<!--
   Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
   contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
   this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
   The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
   (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
   the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.
-->
Apache Jackrabbit: Board Report December 2019
=============================================

## Description: 
The Apache Jackrabbit™ content repository is a fully conforming
implementation of the Content Repository for Java™ Technology API
(JCR, specified in JSR 170 and 283). The Jackrabbit content 
repository is stable, largely feature complete and actively being
maintained. 
Jackrabbit Oak is an effort to implement a scalable and performant 
hierarchical content repository as a modern successor to the Apache
Jackrabbit content repository. It is targeted for use as the 
foundation of modern world-class web sites and other demanding 
content applications. In contrast to its predecessor, Oak does not 
implement all optional features from the JSR specifications and it 
is not a reference implementation. 
   
## Issues: 
There are no issues requiring board attention at this time.
   
## Activity: 
Apache Jackrabbit Oak receives most attention nowadays. All 
maintenance branches and the main development branch are 
continuously seeing moderate to high activity.

We continue making regular feature releases of Jackrabbit Oak. The
most recent release was Jackrabbit Oak 1.20.0 that was made available
on November 25th.  

Apache Jackrabbit itself is mostly in maintenance mode with most of 
the work going into bug fixing and tooling. New features are mainly
driven by dependencies from Jackrabbit Oak.

## Health report: 
The project is healthy with a continuous stream of traffic on all 
mailing lists reflecting the activity of the respective component. 

There is a wide range of topics being discussed on the dev and user
lists as well as on the various JIRA issues. 

Commit activity is moderate to high mirroring the activity on the 
JIRA issues and the desire of the individual contributors to bring
features and improvements in for the next Jackrabbit Oak release.

## PMC changes: 
   
 - Currently 56 PMC members.
 - No new PMC members. Last additions were Mohit Kataria and Nitin
 Gupta on 2019-08-08.
   
## Committer base changes: 
   
 - Currently 56 committers. 
 - No new committers. Last additions were Mohit Kataria and Nitin
 Gupta on 2019-08-08. 
   
## Releases: 
   
 - jackrabbit-2.14.8 was released on 2019-09-12
 - jackrabbit-oak-1.8.17 was released on 2019-09-16
 - jackrabbit-filevault-3.4.0 was released on 2019-09-16
 - jackrabbit-oak-1.10.5 was released on 2019-09-18
 - jackrabbit-oak-1.18.0 was released on 2019-09-30
 - jackrabbit-2.19.5 was released on 2019-10-10
 - jackrabbit-oak-1.6.18 was released on 2019-10-15
 - jackrabbit-2.18.4 was released on 2019-11-08
 - jackrabbit-oak-1.10.6 was released on 2019-11-12
 - jackrabbit-oak-1.20.0 was released on 2019-11-25
 - jackrabbit-oak-1.8.18 was released on 2019-11-29
 - jackrabbit-2.19.6 was released on 2019-12-10
   
## JIRA activity: 
   
 - 261 JIRA tickets created in the last 3 months 
 - 255 JIRA tickets closed/resolved in the last 3 months 